_episodes/07-remotes.md, before:

---
layout: episode
title: "Sharing repositories online"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
  - How can I set up a public repository online?
  - How can I clone a public repository to my computer?
  - How does version control scale from 1 to N users per repository?
objectives:
  - We get a feeling for remote repositories.
  - We are able to publish a repository on the web.
  - We are able to fetch and track a repository from the web.
keypoints:
  - A repository can have one or multiple remotes.
  - Local branches often track remote branches.
---

## From our laptops to the web

We have seen that **creating Git repositories and moving them around is
simple** and that is great.

So far everything was local and all snapshots, branches, and tags are saved under `.git`.

If we remove `.git`, we remove all Git history of a project.

- What if the hard disk fails?
- How can we collaborate with others?

---

## GitHub

One option to host your repository on the web is [GitHub](https://github.com).

GitHub is a for-profit service that hosts remote git repositories for you. It
offers a nice HTML user interface to browse the repositories and handles many
things very nicely.

It is free for public projects and hosting private projects costs a monthly
fee. The free part of the service has made it very popular with many open
source providers.

CodeRefinery does not in any way endorse the use if GitHub. There are many
commercial alternatives such as [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com) or
[Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org). Another option is [NotABug](https://notabug.org).

---

## Set up GitHub account

By now you should already have set up a GitHub account but if you haven't,
please do so [here](https://github.com/join). But it is OK if you want to use
[GitLab](https://gitlab.com) or [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org) or
[NotABug](https://notabug.org) instead.

---

## Sharing a Git repository on GitHub

We will learn how to work with remote repositories in detail in the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson.

In this section we only want to get a taste to prepare us for other lessons
where we will employ GitHub.

Our goal is to publish our guacamole recipe on the web. Don't worry, you will be able
to remove it afterwards.

---

## Create a new repository on GitHub

- Login
- Click on "Repositories"
- Click on the green button "New"

On this page choose a project name (screenshot).

For the sake of this exercise **do not select**
"Initialize this repository with a README" (what will happen if you do?).

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/github/1.jpg" width="60%" style="border:2px solid #000000;">

Once you click the green "Create repository", you will see a page similar to:

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/github/2.jpg" width="60%" style="border:2px solid #000000;">

What this means is that we have now an empty project with either an HTTPS or an
SSH address: click on the HTTPS and SSH buttons to see what happens.

To push changes to the project you will either need SSH keys for the SSH
address (preferred) or you will have to use your GitHub user and password when
using the HTTPS address.

---

## Pushing our guacamole recipe repository to GitHub

We now want to try the second option:

> **... or push an existing repository from the command line**

- Now go to your guacamole repository on your computer.
- Check that you are in the right place with `git status`.
- Copy paste the two lines to the terminal and execute those, in my case:

```shell
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:bast/recipe.git
$ git push -u origin master
```

You should now see:

```
Counting objects: 4, done.
Delta compression using up to 4 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (4/4), done.
Writing objects: 100% (4/4), 259.80 KiB | 0 bytes/s, done.
Total 4 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
To github.com:bast/recipe.git
 * [new branch]      master -> master
Branch master set up to track remote branch master from origin.
```

**Reload your GitHub project website and - taa-daa - your commits should now be
online!**

---

## Cloning a repository

Now other people can clone this repository and suggest changes. In the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson
we will learn how this works.

At this point only a brief demo - if you copy the SSH or HTTPS address, you can clone repositories like this:

```shell
$ git clone git@github.com:bast/recipe.git
```

Commit message:

more explanation in the remotes section

_episodes/07-remotes.md, after:

---
layout: episode
title: "Sharing repositories online"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
  - How can I set up a public repository online?
  - How can I clone a public repository to my computer?
  - How does version control scale from 1 to N users per repository?
objectives:
  - We get a feeling for remote repositories (more later).
  - We are able to publish a repository on the web.
  - We are able to fetch and track a repository from the web.
keypoints:
  - A repository can have one or multiple remotes (we will revisit these later).
  - Local branches often track remote branches.
  - All this might be a bit nebulous but we will add clarity later this week.
---

## From our laptops to the web

We have seen that **creating Git repositories and moving them around is
simple** and that is great.

So far everything was local and all snapshots, branches, and tags are saved under `.git`.

If we remove `.git`, we remove all Git history of a project.

- What if the hard disk fails?
- What if somebody steals my laptop?
- How can we collaborate with others?

---

## GitHub

One option to host your repository on the web is [GitHub](https://github.com).

GitHub is a for-profit service that hosts remote git repositories for you. It
offers a nice HTML user interface to browse the repositories and handles many
things very nicely.

It is free for public projects and hosting private projects costs a monthly fee
(but educational discounts exist). The free part of the service has made it
very popular with many open source providers.

CodeRefinery does not in any way endorse the use if GitHub. There are many
commercial alternatives such as [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com) or
[Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org). Another option is [NotABug](https://notabug.org).

---

## Set up GitHub account

By now you should already have set up a GitHub account but if you haven't,
please do so [here](https://github.com/join). But it is OK if you want to use
[GitLab](https://gitlab.com) or [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org) or
[NotABug](https://notabug.org) or another platform instead.

---

## Sharing a Git repository on GitHub

We will learn how to work with remote repositories in detail in the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson.

In this section we only want to get a taste to prepare us for other lessons
where we will employ GitHub.

Our goal is to publish our guacamole recipe on the web. Don't worry, you will be able
to remove it afterwards.

---

## Create a new repository on GitHub

- Login
- Click on "Repositories"
- Click on the green button "New"

On this page choose a project name (screenshot).

For the sake of this exercise **do not select**
"Initialize this repository with a README" (what will happen if you do?).

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/github/1.jpg" width="60%" style="border:2px solid #000000;">

Once you click the green "Create repository", you will see a page similar to:

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/github/2.jpg" width="60%" style="border:2px solid #000000;">

What this means is that we have now an empty project with either an HTTPS or an
SSH address: click on the HTTPS and SSH buttons to see what happens.

To push changes to the project you will either need SSH keys for the SSH
address (preferred) or you will have to use your GitHub user and password when
using the HTTPS address.

---

## Pushing our guacamole recipe repository to GitHub

We now want to try the second option:

> **... or push an existing repository from the command line**

- Now go to your guacamole repository on your computer.
- Check that you are in the right place with `git status`.
- Copy paste the two lines to the terminal and execute those, in my case (**you
  need to replace the "bast" part and possibly also the repository name**):

```shell
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:bast/recipe.git
$ git push -u origin master
```

You should now see:

```
Counting objects: 4, done.
Delta compression using up to 4 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (4/4), done.
Writing objects: 100% (4/4), 259.80 KiB | 0 bytes/s, done.
Total 4 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
To github.com:bast/recipe.git
 * [new branch]      master -> master
Branch master set up to track remote branch master from origin.
```

**Reload your GitHub project website and - taa-daa - your commits should now be
online!**

What just happened? **Think of publishing a repository as uploading the `.git` part online**.

---

## Cloning a repository

Now other people can clone this repository and contribute changes. In the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson
we will learn how this works.

At this point only a brief demo - if you copy the SSH or HTTPS address, you can clone repositories like this
(again adapt the "namespace/repository.git" part):

```shell
$ git clone git@github.com:bast/recipe.git
```

This creates a directory called "recipe" unless it already exists. You can also specify the target directory
on your computer:

```shell
$ git clone git@github.com:bast/recipe.git myrecipe
```

What just happened? **Think of cloning as downloading the `.git` part to your computer**.
