_episodes/10-conflicts.md, before:

---
layout: episode
title: Conflict resolution
teaching: 10
exercises: 15
questions:
  - How can we resolve conflicts?
  - How can we avoid conflicts?
objectives:
  - Understand the system sufficiently to fix small merge conflicts.
keypoints:
  - Conflicts often appear because of not enough communication or not optimal branching strategy.
---

## Conflict resolution

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/conflict-resolution/mk1.jpg)

In most cases a `git merge` runs smooth and automatic.
Then a merge commit appears (unless fast-forward) without you even noticing.

Git is very good at resolving modifications when merging branches.

But sometimes the same line or portion of the code/text is modified on two branches and Git issues a conflict.
Then you need to tell Git which version to keep.

There are several ways to do that as we will see.

Please remember:

- Conflicts look scary, but not that bad if you stop and take a deep breath. Also they are luckily rare.
- Don't be afraid of Git because of conflicts. You may not meet some conflicts using other systems because you simply can't do the kinds of things you do in Git.
  You can take human measures to reduce them.

---

## Exercise: create a conflict

- Create two branches from `master`: one called `like-cilantro`, one called `dislike-cilantro`:

```shell
$ git graph

*   4b3e3cc (HEAD -> master, like-cilantro, dislike-cilantro) Merge branch 'less-salt'
|\
| * bf59be6 reduce amount of salt
* |   80351a9 Merge branch 'experiment'
|\ \
| * | 6feb49d maybe little bit less cilantro
| * | 7cf6d8c let us try with some cilantro
| |/
* | 40fbb90 draft a readme
|/
* dd4472c we should not forget to enjoy
* 2bb9bb4 add half an onion
* 2d79e7e adding ingredients and instructions
```

- On the two branches make **different modifications** to the amount of the **same ingredient**:

```shell
$ git graph

* eee4b85 (dislike-cilantro) reduce cilantro to 0.5
| * 55d1ce2 (like-cilantro) please more cilantro
|/
*   4b3e3cc (HEAD -> master) Merge branch 'less-salt'
|\
| * bf59be6 reduce amount of salt
* |   80351a9 Merge branch 'experiment'
|\ \
| * | 6feb49d maybe little bit less cilantro
| * | 7cf6d8c let us try with some cilantro
| |/
* | 40fbb90 draft a readme
|/
* dd4472c we should not forget to enjoy
* 2bb9bb4 add half an onion
* 2d79e7e adding ingredients and instructions
```

On the branch `like-cilantro` we have the following change:

```
$ git diff master like-cilantro
```

```diff
diff --git a/ingredients.txt b/ingredients.txt
index a83af39..83f2f94 100644
--- a/ingredients.txt
+++ b/ingredients.txt
@@ -1,4 +1,4 @@
-* 1 tbsp cilantro
+* 2 tbsp cilantro
 * 2 avocados
 * 1 lime
 * 1 tsp salt
```

And on the branch `dislike-cilantro` we have the following change:

```
$ git diff master dislike-cilantro
```

```diff
diff --git a/ingredients.txt b/ingredients.txt
index a83af39..2f60e23 100644
--- a/ingredients.txt
+++ b/ingredients.txt
@@ -1,4 +1,4 @@
-* 1 tbsp cilantro
+* 0.5 tbsp cilantro
 * 2 avocados
 * 1 lime
 * 1 tsp salt
```

### What do you expect will happen when we try to merge these two branches into master?

The first merge will work:

```shell
$ git checkout master
$ git status
$ git merge like-cilantro

Updating 4b3e3cc..55d1ce2
Fast-forward
 ingredients.txt | 2 +-
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+), 1 deletion(-)
```

But the second will fail:


```shell
$ git merge dislike-cilantro

Auto-merging ingredients.txt
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in ingredients.txt
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
```

Without conflict Git would have automatically created a merge commit,
but since there is a conflict, Git did not commit:

```shell
$ git status

On branch master
You have unmerged paths.
  (fix conflicts and run "git commit")
  (use "git merge --abort" to abort the merge)

Unmerged paths:
  (use "git add <file>..." to mark resolution)

	both modified:   ingredients.txt

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

Observe how Git gives us clear instructions on how to move forward.

Let us inspect the conflicting file:

```
$ cat ingredients.txt

<<<<<<< HEAD
* 2 tbsp cilantro
=======
* 0.5 tbsp cilantro
>>>>>>> dislike-cilantro
* 2 avocados
* 1 lime
* 1 tsp salt
* 1/2 onion
```

Git inserted resolution markers (the `<<<<<<<`, `>>>>>>>`, and `=======`).

Try also `git diff`:

```
$ git diff
```

```diff
diff --cc ingredients.txt
index 83f2f94,2f60e23..0000000
--- a/ingredients.txt
+++ b/ingredients.txt
@@@ -1,4 -1,4 +1,8 @@@
++<<<<<<< HEAD
 +* 2 tbsp cilantro
++=======
+ * 0.5 tbsp cilantro
++>>>>>>> dislike-cilantro
  * 2 avocados
  * 1 lime
  * 1 tsp salt
```

`git diff` now only shows the conflicting part, nothing else.

We have to resolve the conflict.
We will discuss 3 different ways to do this.

---

## Manual resolution

```
<<<<<<< HEAD
* 0 tbsp cilantro
=======
* 2 tbsp cilantro
>>>>>>> like-cilantro
```

- Manual resolution means that you have to edit the code/text between the resolution markers.
- Git stages all files without conflicts and leaves the files with conflicts unstaged.
- Decide what you keep (the one, the other, or both or something else).
- Then remove the resolution markers.
- Tell Git that you have resolved the conflict with `git add ingredients.txt`.
- Then verify with `git status`.
- Now commit the merge; this opens up a prepared commit message that you can keep or modify.
- It is good practice to keep the information that there was a conflict in the commit message.

---

## Resolution using mergetool

```shell
$ git mergetool
```

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/conflict-resolution/mergetool.png)

- Your current branch is left, the branch you merge is right, result is in the middle.
- After you are done, close and commit, `git add` is not needed when using `git mergetool`.

If you have not instructed Git to avoid creating backups when using mergetool, then to be on
the safe side there will be additional  temporary files created. To remove those  you can do
a git clean after the merging.

To view what will be removed
`git clean -n`

To remove
`git clean -f`

To configure Git to avoid creating backups at all:

`git config --global mergetool.keepBackup false`

---

## Using "ours" or "theirs" strategy

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/conflict-resolution/mk2.jpg)

- Sometimes you know that you want to keep "ours" version (version on this branch)
  or "theirs" (version on the merged branch).
- Then you do not have to resolve conflicts manually.
- See [merge strategies](https://git-scm.com/docs/merge-strategies).
- If "theirs" is things done by someone else consider how they will feel.

```shell
$ git checkout --theirs ingredients.txt  # take the version of the other branch
                                         # alternative would be --ours
$ git add ingredients.txt                # tell Git that you have resolved it
$ git commit
```

---

## Aborting a conflicting merge

- Imagine it is Friday evening, you try to merge but have conflicts all over the place.
- You do not feel like resolving it now and want to undo the half-finished merge.
- Or it is a conflict that you cannot resolve and only your colleague knows which version is the one to keep.

What to do?

- There is no reason to delete the whole repository.
- You can undo the broken merge by resetting the repository to `HEAD` (last committed state).

```shell
$ git merge --abort
```

The repository looks then exactly as it was before the merge.

---

## Exercise: Resolve the conflict

- Use one of the methods described above to resolve the cilantro conflict

---

## Avoiding conflicts

- Conflicts can be avoided if you think and talk with your colleagues before committing.
- Think and plan to which branch you will commit to.
- Fortran people: modifying common blocks often causes conflicts.
- Modifying global data often causes conflicts.
- Monolithic entangled spaghetti-code maximizes risk of conflicts.
- Modular programming minimizes risk of conflicts.
- Ball-of-mud branches for "everything" maximize risk of conflicts.
- One branch for one task only.
- Resolve conflicts early.
- If the branch affects code that is likely to be modified by others:
  - the branch should be short-lived and/or merge often to the main development line
  - the branch should merge the main development line often to stay up-to-date

Commit message:

trim the manual resolution section

_episodes/10-conflicts.md, after:

---
layout: episode
title: Conflict resolution
teaching: 10
exercises: 15
questions:
  - How can we resolve conflicts?
  - How can we avoid conflicts?
objectives:
  - Understand the system sufficiently to fix small merge conflicts.
keypoints:
  - Conflicts often appear because of not enough communication or not optimal branching strategy.
---

## Conflict resolution

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/conflict-resolution/mk1.jpg)

In most cases a `git merge` runs smooth and automatic.
Then a merge commit appears (unless fast-forward) without you even noticing.

Git is very good at resolving modifications when merging branches.

But sometimes the same line or portion of the code/text is modified on two branches and Git issues a conflict.
Then you need to tell Git which version to keep.

There are several ways to do that as we will see.

Please remember:

- Conflicts look scary, but not that bad if you stop and take a deep breath. Also they are luckily rare.
- Don't be afraid of Git because of conflicts. You may not meet some conflicts using other systems because you simply can't do the kinds of things you do in Git.
  You can take human measures to reduce them.

---

## Exercise: create a conflict

- Create two branches from `master`: one called `like-cilantro`, one called `dislike-cilantro`:

```shell
$ git graph

*   4b3e3cc (HEAD -> master, like-cilantro, dislike-cilantro) Merge branch 'less-salt'
|\
| * bf59be6 reduce amount of salt
* |   80351a9 Merge branch 'experiment'
|\ \
| * | 6feb49d maybe little bit less cilantro
| * | 7cf6d8c let us try with some cilantro
| |/
* | 40fbb90 draft a readme
|/
* dd4472c we should not forget to enjoy
* 2bb9bb4 add half an onion
* 2d79e7e adding ingredients and instructions
```

- On the two branches make **different modifications** to the amount of the **same ingredient**:

```shell
$ git graph

* eee4b85 (dislike-cilantro) reduce cilantro to 0.5
| * 55d1ce2 (like-cilantro) please more cilantro
|/
*   4b3e3cc (HEAD -> master) Merge branch 'less-salt'
|\
| * bf59be6 reduce amount of salt
* |   80351a9 Merge branch 'experiment'
|\ \
| * | 6feb49d maybe little bit less cilantro
| * | 7cf6d8c let us try with some cilantro
| |/
* | 40fbb90 draft a readme
|/
* dd4472c we should not forget to enjoy
* 2bb9bb4 add half an onion
* 2d79e7e adding ingredients and instructions
```

On the branch `like-cilantro` we have the following change:

```
$ git diff master like-cilantro
```

```diff
diff --git a/ingredients.txt b/ingredients.txt
index a83af39..83f2f94 100644
--- a/ingredients.txt
+++ b/ingredients.txt
@@ -1,4 +1,4 @@
-* 1 tbsp cilantro
+* 2 tbsp cilantro
 * 2 avocados
 * 1 lime
 * 1 tsp salt
```

And on the branch `dislike-cilantro` we have the following change:

```
$ git diff master dislike-cilantro
```

```diff
diff --git a/ingredients.txt b/ingredients.txt
index a83af39..2f60e23 100644
--- a/ingredients.txt
+++ b/ingredients.txt
@@ -1,4 +1,4 @@
-* 1 tbsp cilantro
+* 0.5 tbsp cilantro
 * 2 avocados
 * 1 lime
 * 1 tsp salt
```

### What do you expect will happen when we try to merge these two branches into master?

The first merge will work:

```shell
$ git checkout master
$ git status
$ git merge like-cilantro

Updating 4b3e3cc..55d1ce2
Fast-forward
 ingredients.txt | 2 +-
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+), 1 deletion(-)
```

But the second will fail:


```shell
$ git merge dislike-cilantro

Auto-merging ingredients.txt
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in ingredients.txt
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
```

Without conflict Git would have automatically created a merge commit,
but since there is a conflict, Git did not commit:

```shell
$ git status

On branch master
You have unmerged paths.
  (fix conflicts and run "git commit")
  (use "git merge --abort" to abort the merge)

Unmerged paths:
  (use "git add <file>..." to mark resolution)

	both modified:   ingredients.txt

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

Observe how Git gives us clear instructions on how to move forward.

Let us inspect the conflicting file:

```
$ cat ingredients.txt

<<<<<<< HEAD
* 2 tbsp cilantro
=======
* 0.5 tbsp cilantro
>>>>>>> dislike-cilantro
* 2 avocados
* 1 lime
* 1 tsp salt
* 1/2 onion
```

Git inserted resolution markers (the `<<<<<<<`, `>>>>>>>`, and `=======`).

Try also `git diff`:

```
$ git diff
```

```diff
diff --cc ingredients.txt
index 83f2f94,2f60e23..0000000
--- a/ingredients.txt
+++ b/ingredients.txt
@@@ -1,4 -1,4 +1,8 @@@
++<<<<<<< HEAD
 +* 2 tbsp cilantro
++=======
+ * 0.5 tbsp cilantro
++>>>>>>> dislike-cilantro
  * 2 avocados
  * 1 lime
  * 1 tsp salt
```

`git diff` now only shows the conflicting part, nothing else.

We have to resolve the conflict.
We will discuss 3 different ways to do this.

---

## Manual resolution

```
<<<<<<< HEAD
* 2 tbsp cilantro
=======
* 0.5 tbsp cilantro
>>>>>>> dislike-cilantro
```

- We have to edit the code/text between the resolution markers.
- Git stages all files without conflicts and leaves the files with conflicts unstaged.
- Decide what you keep (the one, the other, or both or something else).
- Then remove the resolution markers.
- Don't forget to run `git diff` after you have attempted resolution.
- Tell Git that you have resolved the conflict with `git add ingredients.txt`, then verify with `git status`.
- Finally commit the merge.

---

## Resolution using mergetool

```shell
$ git mergetool
```

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/conflict-resolution/mergetool.png)

- Your current branch is left, the branch you merge is right, result is in the middle.
- After you are done, close and commit, `git add` is not needed when using `git mergetool`.

If you have not instructed Git to avoid creating backups when using mergetool, then to be on
the safe side there will be additional  temporary files created. To remove those  you can do
a git clean after the merging.

To view what will be removed
`git clean -n`

To remove
`git clean -f`

To configure Git to avoid creating backups at all:

`git config --global mergetool.keepBackup false`

---

## Using "ours" or "theirs" strategy

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/conflict-resolution/mk2.jpg)

- Sometimes you know that you want to keep "ours" version (version on this branch)
  or "theirs" (version on the merged branch).
- Then you do not have to resolve conflicts manually.
- See [merge strategies](https://git-scm.com/docs/merge-strategies).
- If "theirs" is things done by someone else consider how they will feel.

```shell
$ git checkout --theirs ingredients.txt  # take the version of the other branch
                                         # alternative would be --ours
$ git add ingredients.txt                # tell Git that you have resolved it
$ git commit
```

---

## Aborting a conflicting merge

- Imagine it is Friday evening, you try to merge but have conflicts all over the place.
- You do not feel like resolving it now and want to undo the half-finished merge.
- Or it is a conflict that you cannot resolve and only your colleague knows which version is the one to keep.

What to do?

- There is no reason to delete the whole repository.
- You can undo the broken merge by resetting the repository to `HEAD` (last committed state).

```shell
$ git merge --abort
```

The repository looks then exactly as it was before the merge.

---

## Exercise: Resolve the conflict

- Use one of the methods described above to resolve the cilantro conflict

---

## Avoiding conflicts

- Conflicts can be avoided if you think and talk with your colleagues before committing.
- Think and plan to which branch you will commit to.
- Fortran people: modifying common blocks often causes conflicts.
- Modifying global data often causes conflicts.
- Monolithic entangled spaghetti-code maximizes risk of conflicts.
- Modular programming minimizes risk of conflicts.
- Ball-of-mud branches for "everything" maximize risk of conflicts.
- One branch for one task only.
- Resolve conflicts early.
- If the branch affects code that is likely to be modified by others:
  - the branch should be short-lived and/or merge often to the main development line
  - the branch should merge the main development line often to stay up-to-date
