content/index.rst, before:

.. _index:

Introduction to version control with Git
========================================

This is the introductory lesson to version control using
`Git <https://git-scm.com/>`__. It is assumed to be the very first thing
done in a course.

Our philosophy is that we start from own local repository, branching and
merging (locally), and a brief introduction to pushing to remotes. In
the separate `collaborative Git
lesson <https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/>`__, we teach more use of
remote repositories and good collaborative workflows. We try to stick to
simple workflows, just enough for researchers who are not obsessed with
Git to be able to work well. We try to avoid commands which might get
you into a confusing state.

The goals of the module as a whole are that the user will feel
comfortable about staging changes, committing them, merging, and
branching.


.. prereq::

   -  A reasonably recent version of **Git is installed**
      (`installation
      instructions <https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/>`__).
   -  **Git should be configured prior to the course**
      following `our installation
      instructions <https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/>`__.
   -  A `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ user account (but alternatives
      exist, see below).
   -  Being comfortable with the command line. No expertise is required,
      but the lesson will be mostly taken from the command line.
   -  Students should be familiar with using a **text editor** on their
      system. Emacs and Vim are excellent choices if you know how to use
      them but Nano or Notepad on Windows are sufficient.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Core episodes

   motivation
   basics
   branches
   conflicts
   remotes
   archaeology
   level


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Optional episodes

   staging-area
   recovering
   interrupted
   aliases
   under-the-hood


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Reference

   reference
   customizing
   what-to-avoid
   resources
   exercises
   guide

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: About

   All lessons <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/>
   CodeRefinery <https://coderefinery.org/>
   Reusing <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/reusing/>



.. admonition:: Why GitHub?

   In this introduction we will mention and use
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ but also
   `GitLab <https://gitlab.com>`__ and
   `Bitbucket <https://bitbucket.org>`__ allow similar workflows and
   basically everything that we will discuss is transferable. With this
   material and these exercises we do not endorse the company
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__. We have chosen to demonstrate a
   number of concepts using examples with
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ because it is currently the most
   popular web platform for hosting Git repositories and the chance is
   high that you will interact with
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__-based repositories even if you choose
   to host your Git repository on another platform.

   Course participants are most welcome to use our `Nordic research
   software repository platform <https://source.coderefinery.org>`__
   instead, for more information see
   https://coderefinery.org/repository/.

Commit message:

update and shorten the index page
- we recommend nano or vs code as editor to start
- avoid repetition in sentences

content/index.rst, after:

.. _index:

Introduction to version control with Git
========================================

This is the introductory lesson to version control using
`Git <https://git-scm.com/>`__. It is assumed to be the very first thing
done in a course.

Our philosophy is that we start from own local repository, branching and
merging (locally), and a brief introduction to pushing to remotes. In
the separate `collaborative Git
lesson <https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/>`__, we teach more use of
remote repositories and good collaborative workflows. We try to stick to
simple workflows, just enough for researchers who are not obsessed with
Git to be able to work well. We try to avoid commands which might get
you into a confusing state.

The goals of the module as a whole are that the user will feel
comfortable about staging changes, committing them, merging, and
branching.


.. prereq::

   -  A reasonably recent version of Git is installed **and configured**
      (`installation
      instructions <https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/>`__).
   -  For one of the episodes we need a `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ user
      account (but alternatives exist, see below).
   -  Being comfortable with the command line. No expertise is required, but
      the lesson will be mostly taken from the command line (we also have another
      lesson on `Collaborating and sharing using GitHub without command line
      <https://coderefinery.github.io/github-without-command-line/>`__).
   -  Students should be familiar with using a **text editor** on their
      system. If you are new to text editors, we recommend to start with Nano
      or VS Code.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Core episodes

   motivation
   basics
   branches
   conflicts
   remotes
   archaeology
   level


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Optional episodes

   staging-area
   recovering
   interrupted
   aliases
   under-the-hood


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Reference

   reference
   customizing
   what-to-avoid
   resources
   exercises
   guide

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: About

   All lessons <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/>
   CodeRefinery <https://coderefinery.org/>
   Reusing <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/reusing/>



.. admonition:: Why GitHub?

   In this introduction we will mention and use
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ but also
   `GitLab <https://gitlab.com>`__ and
   `Bitbucket <https://bitbucket.org>`__ allow similar workflows and
   basically everything that we will discuss is transferable. With this
   material and these exercises we do not endorse the company
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__. We have chosen to demonstrate a
   number of concepts using examples with
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ because it is currently the most
   popular web platform for hosting Git repositories and the chance is
   high that you will interact with
   `GitHub <https://github.com>`__-based repositories even if you choose
   to host your Git repository on another platform.

   Course participants are most welcome to use our `Nordic research
   software repository platform <https://coderefinery.org/repository/>`__.
