content/local-workflow.md, before:

# Cloning a Git repository and working locally

If you've been following the main path, you have just had interacted
with repositories on GitHub. This might not be what you usually
do, so now we move to working on your own computer.

:::{objectives}
- We are able to clone a repository from the web and modify it locally.
- We can do the same things we did before (commit, branch, merge), but locally.
- We get a feeling for remote repositories ([more later](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/)).
:::

:::{instructor-note}
- 10 min introduction and setup
- 25 min exercise
- 15 min discussion
:::


## What is in a Git repository and what are we cloning?

**Git repository**:
- Contains all the files and directories of a project.
- Contains the complete history of all changes (commits) to these files and directories.
- Each commit is a snapshot of the entire project at a certain point in time and has a unique identifier ("hash").
- Sometimes it contains multiple branches and tags.
- All the commits and history of a local repository are stored in a directory
  called `.git` which is located at the root of the repository.

**Cloning**:
- Copying (downloading) the entire repository with all commits, branches, and tags to your computer.
- It is a full backup of the repository, including all history.
- You can then work on your local clone of the repository.
- Changes on local clone will not automatically appear in the repository where
  we cloned from. We have to actively "push" them there (we will practice this
  in a later episode: {ref}`sharing-repositories`).


## Exercise

Work on this by yourself or in your teams. Conceptually this episode should
seem familiar, from the browser-based exercises we did yesterday.

We offer the **Command Line and VS Code** paths for this exercise.
GitHub isn't an option in this episode, since that is what we already
demonstrated in {doc}`commits` and {doc}`merging` and since the point of this
episode is to work **locally**.

It is also possible to use the command line (terminal) from inside VS Code.

```{exercise} Exercise: Cloning a Git repository and working locally (25 min)
1. {ref}`Configure Git command line and editor <configuration>` if you haven't done that already.
1. **Decide which repository you want to clone**: your fork or the original repository? Both will work for this exercise.
   Then, **clone the recipe book**.
1. **Create a new branch**.
1. Make a **commit** on your new branch.
1. **Switch** back to the `main` branch and create one or two commits there.
1. **Merge** the new branch into `main`.
1. Compare the graph locally and on GitHub and observe that the **changes only exist locally on your computer**.
1. Where are the **remote branches**? Practice how you can see all remote branches
   also locally and how you can fetch them and make local changes to them.
```

The solution below goes over most of the answer and should be used as
your guide (you can't figure it out just from the exercise instructions).


## Solution and walk-through


### (1) Configure Git command line and editor

We have an own section for this: {ref}`configuration`.


### (2) Cloning a repository

Now you need to decide which repository you want to clone. All of these options will work for this exercise
since we don't plan to push changes back (for step 8 it might be easier to use the original repository):
- Clone the recipe book from your fork.
- Or clone the recipe book from the original repository: <https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book>
- Or first fork the original repository and then clone your fork.

The examples below assume you are cloning the original repository. If you are cloning your fork, you should
replace `coderefinery` with your GitHub username.

:::::::{tabs}
::::::{group-tab} Command line
If you are unsure whether you are using SSH or HTTPS, please read {ref}`clone-method`.
  :::::{tabs}
    ::::{group-tab} SSH
      ```console
      $ git clone git@github.com:coderefinery/recipe-book.git
      ```
    ::::

    ::::{group-tab} HTTPS
      ```console
      $ git clone https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book.git
      ```
    ::::
  :::::

This creates a directory called "recipe-book" unless it already exists. You can also specify the target directory
on your computer (in this case "my-recipe-book"):
  :::::{tabs}
    ::::{group-tab} SSH
      ```console
      $ git clone git@github.com:coderefinery/recipe-book.git my-recipe-book
      ```
    ::::

    ::::{group-tab} HTTPS
      ```console
      $ git clone https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book.git my-recipe-book
      ```
    ::::
  :::::
::::::

::::::{group-tab} VS Code
Start a new window.

If you have the "Welcome" tab when you start a new window: Under "Start" on the screen, select "Clone Git Repository...".

Alternatively navigate to the "Source Control" tab on the left sidebar and
click on the "Clone Repository" button.  You need to have started a
brand new window that's not part of a project.

Paste in this URL: `https://github.com/USER/recipe-book` (replace `USER`)
::::::

::::::{group-tab} RStudio
(This pathway is in draft stage: we don't have screenshots yet.)

You can clone a repository via File → New Project → Version Control →
Git.

Enter the repository URL: see "command line" instructions for hints
here.  RStudio, like most things, uses regular Git in the background
so all the same command line choices apply: see part (1).  We'd
recommend SSH if possible.
::::::

:::::::


### (3) Creating branches locally

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
Create a new branch called `another-recipe` from `main` and switch to it:
```console
$ git switch --create another-recipe main
```

If you leave out the last argument, it will create a branch from the current
branch:
```console
$ git switch --create another-recipe
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
1. Make sure that you are on the main branch.
1. Source Control button on left sidebar → Three dots in upper right of source control → Branch → Create Branch.
1. VS Code automatically switches to the new branch.

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-create-branch.png
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
:alt: VS Code screenshot of create branch

Creating a new branch in VS Code.
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
The main way to control git is via the Git tab in the right side
panel: it's a tab along with "Environment", "History", etc.  This will
be called the "Git tab".

From the git tab, branches are controlled on the right side of the
icon bar.  The purple button allows creating branches and the drop-down next to it allows switching.  If you select "Sync branch with remote", it will push that branch (with no commits on it) to the remote immediately.


```{figure} img/commits/rstudio-create-branch.png
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
:alt: RStudio screenshot of create branch

Creating a branch in RStudio
```


::::


:::::


### (4) Creating commits locally

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
Create a new file. **After we have created it**, we can stage and commit
the change:
```console
$ git add new-file.md
$ git commit -m "Short summary of the change"
```

Make sure to replace "new-file.md" with the actual name of the file you created
and to replace "Short summary of the change" with a meaningful commit message.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
1. Create a new file.
1. In the version control sidebar, click the `+` sign to add the file for the next commit.
1. Enter a brief message and click "Commit".

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-add-and-commit.png
:alt: Screenshot of VS Code commit process
:width: 80%
:class: with-border

Committing a new file in VS Code.
:::
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio

1. One creates the file in the normal way,
1. In the git tab, one uses the checkbox under "Staged" to add mark the file as {term}`staged <staging area>`, which means it will be committed next.
1. Click the checkmarks to commit.  A new window will be opened.

:::{figure} img/commits/rstudio-committing.png
:alt: Screenshot of RStudio commit process
:width: 80%
:class: with-border

Staging and committing file in RStudio.
:::

The commit message corresponds to what you would see on the command line (we haven't learned these diff commands yet, but are mentioned in {doc}`staging-area`):

:::{figure} img/commits/rstudio-commit-message.png
:alt: Screenshot of RStudio commit message entry
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
::::


:::::


### (5) Switching branches and creating commits

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
First switch to the `main` branch:
```console
$ git switch main
```

Then modify a file. Finally `git add` and then commit the change:
```console
$ git commit -m "Short summary of the change"
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Use the branch selector at the bottom to switch back to the main branch.
Repeat the same steps as above.

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-change-branch.png
:class: with-border
:width: 80%
:alt: VS Code screenshot

Switching branch via selector at bottom.
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
Switch to the `main` branch again, via the branch switcher right next to the "create new branch" button (see step (3)).

Commit like before.
::::


:::::


### (6) Merging branches locally

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
On the command line, when we merge, we always modify our current branch.

If you are not sure anymore what your current branch is, type:
```console
$ git branch
```

Another way to find out where we are in Git:
```console
$ git status
```

In this case we merge the `another-recipe` branch into our current branch:
```console
$ git merge another-recipe
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Just like with the command line, when we merge we modify our *current* branch.  Verify you are on the `main` branch.

1. Verify current branch at the bottom.
1. From the version control sidebar → Three dots → Branch → Merge
1. In the selector that comes up, choose the branch you want to merge *from*.  The commits on that branch will be added to the current branch.

:::{figure} img/merging/vscode-merging.png
:alt: VSCode screenshot as described
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
It doesn't seem theer is a graphical way to do this.  Luckily, like usual, via the Terminal you can use the "Command line" method.
::::

:::::


### (7) How to compare the graph locally and on GitHub

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
```console
$ git log --graph --oneline --decorate --all
```

We recommend to define an {term}`alias` in Git, to be able to nicely visualize
branch structure in the terminal without having to remember a long Git command:
```console
$ git config --global alias.graph "log --all --graph --decorate --oneline"
```
Then you can just type `git graph` from there on. We have an own section about
aliases: {ref}`aliases`.

Compare this with the graph on GitHub: Insights tab → Network view (just like
we have done before).
The result is that we should not be able to see the new branch and the new
commits on GitHub (since we haven't pushed it to GitHub yet - it is only local work so far).
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
This requires an extension.  Opening the VS Code terminal lets you use the command line method.

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-open-terminal.png
:class: with-border
:width: 80%
:alt: VS Code screenshot as described

View → Terminal will open a terminal at bottom.  This is a normal command line interface and very useful for work.  (Note the git-aware prompt that shows the current branch.  This requires other setup.)
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
You can find a graph view in RStudio, but it doesn't seem you can compare arbitrary commits without an extension.  Luckily, the command line method works, as usual.

1. From the git tab,
1. Select the clock icon to go to "History" view
1. Select "(all branches)" to see full graph (equivalent of `--all` in the command line)

:::{figure} img/commits/rstudio-graph-view.png
:class: with-border
:width: 80%
:alt: RStudio screenshot as described
::::

Compare this with the graph on GitHub: Insights tab → Network view (just like
we have done before).
The result is that we should not be able to see the new branch and the new
commits on GitHub (since we haven't pushed it to GitHub yet - it is only local work so far).


:::::


### (8) Browsing remote branches and creating local branches from them

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
With `git branch` you can list all local branches:
```console
$ git branch

  another-recipe
* main
```

But where are the remote branches? We expect to see [a couple of
them](https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book/branches/all).

We can see them by asking for all branches (your output might vary depending on
where you cloned from):
```console
$ git branch --all

  another-recipe
* main
  remotes/origin/HEAD -> origin/main
  remotes/origin/alex/fruit-salad
  remotes/origin/main
  remotes/origin/radovan/lasagna
  remotes/origin/radovan/poke
```

You can create a local branch from a remote branch which will "track" the remote branch.
For instance, to create a local branch `alex/fruit-salad` from the remote branch `origin/alex/fruit-salad`
and switch to it, you can do:
```console
$ git switch --create alex/fruit-salad origin/alex/fruit-salad
```

This shortcut will do the same thing:
```console
$ git switch --track origin/alex/fruit-salad
```

Or even shorter:
```console
$ git switch alex/fruit-salad
```

If you want to create a branch and not switch to it, you can use `git branch`.
```console
$ git branch alex/fruit-salad
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
To create a local branch from a remote branch:

Source Control button on left sidebar → Three dots in upper right of source control → Branch → 
"Create Branch From ...".

Then select the remote branch you want to create a local branch from.
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
The branch picker also lists branches on remotes.  If you click on of them, it will create a local branch and track it.
::::

:::::


## Summary

- When we clone a repository, we get a full backup of the repository, including
  all history: all commits, branches, and tags.
- Yesterday we learned about branches and commits, and now we created and used them locally.
- **Creating local branches and commits does not automatically modify the remote
  repository**. To "push" our local changes to the remote repository, we have to actively
  "push" them there. We will practice this in a later episode:
  {ref}`sharing-repositories`
- Remote branches and local branches are not the same thing. If we want to
  create local commits, we always need to create a local branch first. But the local branch can
  "track" the remote branch and we can push and pull changes to and from the
  remote branch.

Commit message:

git remote -v.md
On day 2 there was a talk about how to use git remote -v in vs code please check description

content/local-workflow.md, after:

# Cloning a Git repository and working locally

If you've been following the main path, you have just had interacted
with repositories on GitHub. This might not be what you usually
do, so now we move to working on your own computer.

:::{objectives}
- We are able to clone a repository from the web and modify it locally.
- We can do the same things we did before (commit, branch, merge), but locally.
- We get a feeling for remote repositories ([more later](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/)).
:::

:::{instructor-note}
- 10 min introduction and setup
- 25 min exercise
- 15 min discussion
:::


## What is in a Git repository and what are we cloning?

**Git repository**:
- Contains all the files and directories of a project.
- Contains the complete history of all changes (commits) to these files and directories.
- Each commit is a snapshot of the entire project at a certain point in time and has a unique identifier ("hash").
- Sometimes it contains multiple branches and tags.
- All the commits and history of a local repository are stored in a directory
  called `.git` which is located at the root of the repository.

**Cloning**:
- Copying (downloading) the entire repository with all commits, branches, and tags to your computer.
- It is a full backup of the repository, including all history.
- You can then work on your local clone of the repository.
- Changes on local clone will not automatically appear in the repository where
  we cloned from. We have to actively "push" them there (we will practice this
  in a later episode: {ref}`sharing-repositories`).


## Exercise

Work on this by yourself or in your teams. Conceptually this episode should
seem familiar, from the browser-based exercises we did yesterday.

We offer the **Command Line and VS Code** paths for this exercise.
GitHub isn't an option in this episode, since that is what we already
demonstrated in {doc}`commits` and {doc}`merging` and since the point of this
episode is to work **locally**.

It is also possible to use the command line (terminal) from inside VS Code.

```{exercise} Exercise: Cloning a Git repository and working locally (25 min)
1. {ref}`Configure Git command line and editor <configuration>` if you haven't done that already.
1. **Decide which repository you want to clone**: your fork or the original repository? Both will work for this exercise.
   Then, **clone the recipe book**.
1. **Create a new branch**.
1. Make a **commit** on your new branch.
1. **Switch** back to the `main` branch and create one or two commits there.
1. **Merge** the new branch into `main`.
1. Compare the graph locally and on GitHub and observe that the **changes only exist locally on your computer**.
1. Where are the **remote branches**? Practice how you can see all remote branches
   also locally and how you can fetch them and make local changes to them.
```

The solution below goes over most of the answer and should be used as
your guide (you can't figure it out just from the exercise instructions).


## Solution and walk-through


### (1) Configure Git command line and editor

We have an own section for this: {ref}`configuration`.


### (2) Cloning a repository

Now you need to decide which repository you want to clone. All of these options will work for this exercise
since we don't plan to push changes back (for step 8 it might be easier to use the original repository):
- Clone the recipe book from your fork.
- Or clone the recipe book from the original repository: <https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book>
- Or first fork the original repository and then clone your fork.

The examples below assume you are cloning the original repository. If you are cloning your fork, you should
replace `coderefinery` with your GitHub username.

:::::::{tabs}
::::::{group-tab} Command line
If you are unsure whether you are using SSH or HTTPS, please read {ref}`clone-method`.
  :::::{tabs}
    ::::{group-tab} SSH
      ```console
      $ git clone git@github.com:coderefinery/recipe-book.git
      ```
    ::::

    ::::{group-tab} HTTPS
      ```console
      $ git clone https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book.git
      ```
    ::::
  :::::

This creates a directory called "recipe-book" unless it already exists. You can also specify the target directory
on your computer (in this case "my-recipe-book"):
  :::::{tabs}
    ::::{group-tab} SSH
      ```console
      $ git clone git@github.com:coderefinery/recipe-book.git my-recipe-book
      ```
    ::::

    ::::{group-tab} HTTPS
      ```console
      $ git clone https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book.git my-recipe-book
      ```
    ::::
  :::::
::::::

::::::{group-tab} VS Code
Start a new window.

If you have the "Welcome" tab when you start a new window: Under "Start" on the screen, select "Clone Git Repository...".

Alternatively navigate to the "Source Control" tab on the left sidebar and
click on the "Clone Repository" button.  You need to have started a
brand new window that's not part of a project.

Paste in this URL: `https://github.com/USER/recipe-book` (replace `USER`)
::::::

::::::{group-tab} RStudio
(This pathway is in draft stage: we don't have screenshots yet.)

You can clone a repository via File → New Project → Version Control →
Git.

Enter the repository URL: see "command line" instructions for hints
here.  RStudio, like most things, uses regular Git in the background
so all the same command line choices apply: see part (1).  We'd
recommend SSH if possible.
::::::

:::::::


### (3) Creating branches locally

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
Create a new branch called `another-recipe` from `main` and switch to it:
```console
$ git switch --create another-recipe main
```

If you leave out the last argument, it will create a branch from the current
branch:
```console
$ git switch --create another-recipe
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
1. Make sure that you are on the main branch.
1. Source Control button on left sidebar → Three dots in upper right of source control → Branch → Create Branch.
1. VS Code automatically switches to the new branch.

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-create-branch.png
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
:alt: VS Code screenshot of create branch

Creating a new branch in VS Code.
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
The main way to control git is via the Git tab in the right side
panel: it's a tab along with "Environment", "History", etc.  This will
be called the "Git tab".

From the git tab, branches are controlled on the right side of the
icon bar.  The purple button allows creating branches and the drop-down next to it allows switching.  If you select "Sync branch with remote", it will push that branch (with no commits on it) to the remote immediately.


```{figure} img/commits/rstudio-create-branch.png
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
:alt: RStudio screenshot of create branch

Creating a branch in RStudio
```


::::


:::::


### (4) Creating commits locally

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
Create a new file. **After we have created it**, we can stage and commit
the change:
```console
$ git add new-file.md
$ git commit -m "Short summary of the change"
```

Make sure to replace "new-file.md" with the actual name of the file you created
and to replace "Short summary of the change" with a meaningful commit message.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
1. Create a new file.
1. In the version control sidebar, click the `+` sign to add the file for the next commit.
1. Enter a brief message and click "Commit".

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-add-and-commit.png
:alt: Screenshot of VS Code commit process
:width: 80%
:class: with-border

Committing a new file in VS Code.
:::
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio

1. One creates the file in the normal way,
1. In the git tab, one uses the checkbox under "Staged" to add mark the file as {term}`staged <staging area>`, which means it will be committed next.
1. Click the checkmarks to commit.  A new window will be opened.

:::{figure} img/commits/rstudio-committing.png
:alt: Screenshot of RStudio commit process
:width: 80%
:class: with-border

Staging and committing file in RStudio.
:::

The commit message corresponds to what you would see on the command line (we haven't learned these diff commands yet, but are mentioned in {doc}`staging-area`):

:::{figure} img/commits/rstudio-commit-message.png
:alt: Screenshot of RStudio commit message entry
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
::::


:::::


### (5) Switching branches and creating commits

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
First switch to the `main` branch:
```console
$ git switch main
```

Then modify a file. Finally `git add` and then commit the change:
```console
$ git commit -m "Short summary of the change"
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Use the branch selector at the bottom to switch back to the main branch.
Repeat the same steps as above.

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-change-branch.png
:class: with-border
:width: 80%
:alt: VS Code screenshot

Switching branch via selector at bottom.
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
Switch to the `main` branch again, via the branch switcher right next to the "create new branch" button (see step (3)).

Commit like before.
::::


:::::


### (6) Merging branches locally

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
On the command line, when we merge, we always modify our current branch.

If you are not sure anymore what your current branch is, type:
```console
$ git branch
```

Another way to find out where we are in Git:
```console
$ git status
```

In this case we merge the `another-recipe` branch into our current branch:
```console
$ git merge another-recipe
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Just like with the command line, when we merge we modify our *current* branch.  Verify you are on the `main` branch.

1. Verify current branch at the bottom.
1. From the version control sidebar → Three dots → Branch → Merge
1. In the selector that comes up, choose the branch you want to merge *from*.  The commits on that branch will be added to the current branch.

:::{figure} img/merging/vscode-merging.png
:alt: VSCode screenshot as described
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
It doesn't seem theer is a graphical way to do this.  Luckily, like usual, via the Terminal you can use the "Command line" method.
::::

:::::


### (7) How to compare the graph locally and on GitHub

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
```console
$ git log --graph --oneline --decorate --all
```

We recommend to define an {term}`alias` in Git, to be able to nicely visualize
branch structure in the terminal without having to remember a long Git command:
```console
$ git config --global alias.graph "log --all --graph --decorate --oneline"
```
Then you can just type `git graph` from there on. We have an own section about
aliases: {ref}`aliases`.

Compare this with the graph on GitHub: Insights tab → Network view (just like
we have done before).
The result is that we should not be able to see the new branch and the new
commits on GitHub (since we haven't pushed it to GitHub yet - it is only local work so far).
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
This requires an extension.  Opening the VS Code terminal lets you use the command line method.

:::{figure} img/commits/vscode-open-terminal.png
:class: with-border
:width: 80%
:alt: VS Code screenshot as described

View → Terminal will open a terminal at bottom.  This is a normal command line interface and very useful for work.  (Note the git-aware prompt that shows the current branch.  This requires other setup.)
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
You can find a graph view in RStudio, but it doesn't seem you can compare arbitrary commits without an extension.  Luckily, the command line method works, as usual.

1. From the git tab,
1. Select the clock icon to go to "History" view
1. Select "(all branches)" to see full graph (equivalent of `--all` in the command line)

:::{figure} img/commits/rstudio-graph-view.png
:class: with-border
:width: 80%
:alt: RStudio screenshot as described
::::

Compare this with the graph on GitHub: Insights tab → Network view (just like
we have done before).
The result is that we should not be able to see the new branch and the new
commits on GitHub (since we haven't pushed it to GitHub yet - it is only local work so far).


:::::


### (8) Browsing remote branches and creating local branches from them

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} Command line
With `git branch` you can list all local branches:
```console
$ git branch

  another-recipe
* main
```

But where are the remote branches? We expect to see [a couple of
them](https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-book/branches/all).

We can see them by asking for all branches (your output might vary depending on
where you cloned from):
```console
$ git branch --all

  another-recipe
* main
  remotes/origin/HEAD -> origin/main
  remotes/origin/alex/fruit-salad
  remotes/origin/main
  remotes/origin/radovan/lasagna
  remotes/origin/radovan/poke
```

You can create a local branch from a remote branch which will "track" the remote branch.
For instance, to create a local branch `alex/fruit-salad` from the remote branch `origin/alex/fruit-salad`
and switch to it, you can do:
```console
$ git switch --create alex/fruit-salad origin/alex/fruit-salad
```

This shortcut will do the same thing:
```console
$ git switch --track origin/alex/fruit-salad
```

Or even shorter:
```console
$ git switch alex/fruit-salad
```

If you want to create a branch and not switch to it, you can use `git branch`.
```console
$ git branch alex/fruit-salad
```
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
To create a local branch from a remote branch:

Source Control button on left sidebar → Three dots in upper right of source control → Branch → 
"Create Branch From ...".

Then select the remote branch you want to create a local branch from.
::::

::::{group-tab} RStudio
The branch picker also lists branches on remotes.  If you click on of them, it will create a local branch and track it.
::::

:::::
## git remote -v
Since there was a talk of how to use it in VSCODE on the lesson , i did it before 

Open your project in Visual Studio Code.
Open the Source Control view by clicking on the source control icon in the Activity Bar on the side of the window.!

At the top of the Source Control view, there should be a list of branches and a button that says "master or main" (or the name of your current branch). Click on the button to open the Git menu. ![image](https://github.com/coderefinery/git-intro/assets/162412802/23e36e00-31bc-4a23-9e1d-50aa614aa7e4)

From the Git menu, you can click on Repository Remotes to view the remote repositories associated with your local repository. ![image](https://github.com/coderefinery/git-intro/assets/162412802/88a94484-f2aa-4dc1-96ed-5ffbfa511199)

Hope its helpfull


## Summary

- When we clone a repository, we get a full backup of the repository, including
  all history: all commits, branches, and tags.
- Yesterday we learned about branches and commits, and now we created and used them locally.
- **Creating local branches and commits does not automatically modify the remote
  repository**. To "push" our local changes to the remote repository, we have to actively
  "push" them there. We will practice this in a later episode:
  {ref}`sharing-repositories`
- Remote branches and local branches are not the same thing. If we want to
  create local commits, we always need to create a local branch first. But the local branch can
  "track" the remote branch and we can push and pull changes to and from the
  remote branch.
