content/merging.md, before:

# Merging changes and contributing to the project

Git allows us to have different development lines where we can try things out.
It also allows different people to work on the same project at the same.  This
means that we have to somehow combine the changes later. In this part we will
practice this: {term}`merging`.

:::{objectives}
- Understand that on GitHub merging is done through a {term}`pull request`. Think of it as a change proposal.
- Create and merge a pull request within your own repository.
- Understand (and optionally) do the same to contribute to the {term}`upstream` public repository.
:::

:::{instructor-note}
- 10 min introduction and setup
- 25 min exercise
- 15 min discussion
:::


## Background

* In the last episode, we added a new recipe on a branch.  This allows
  us to test it before it becomes "live".
* Now, we want to bring that change into the "main" branch.
* We find it's not that hard!  But you do have to keep track of the
  steps and make sure that you work very precisely.


## Exercise

In this exercise, we will show how we can **propose changes** and **merge
changes** within our own repository. Optionally, you can propose a recipe to
the {term}`upstream` recipe book - which shows the true purpose of this.  But
this is only a preview and we will practice collaboration much more in the
[collaborative Git lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).

We offer **three different paths** of how to do this exercise.  For
the CodeRefinery workshop day 1, we use and demonstrate the **GitHub
path** only and recommend you do that.  The exercise text below has
some GitHub-specific notes, but most is possibly with any path.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub

First, we make something called a {term}`pull request`, which allows
review and commenting before the actual merge.

:::{exercise} Exercise: Merging branches with pull requests (20 min)
We assume that in the previous exercise you have created a new branch
with a recipe.  In our previous example, it is called `new-recipe`.
If not, create it first and add a recipe to your new branch, see
{doc}`commits`.

We provide basic hints. You should refer to the solution as needed.

1. Navigate to your branch from the previous episode
   (Hint: the same branch view we used last time).

1. Begin the pull request process.
   (Hint: There is a "Contribute" button in the branch view).

1. Add or modify the pull request title and description, and verify the other data.
   In the pull request verify the target repository and the target
   branch. Make sure that you are merging within your own repository.
   **GitHub: By default, it will offer to make the change to the
   upstream repository, `coderefinery`.  You should change this**, you
   shouldn't contribute your test recipe upstream yet.  Where it says
   `base repository`, select your own user's repository.

1. Create the pull request by clicking "Create pull request". Browse
   the network view to see if anything has changed yet.

1. Merge the pull request, or if you are not on GitHub you can merge
   the branch locally. Browse the network again. What has changed?

1. Find out which branches are merged and thus safe to delete. Then remove them
   and verify that the commits are still there, only the branch labels are
   gone. (Hint: you can delete branches that have been merged into `main`).

1. Optional: Try to create a new branch with a new change, then open a pull
   request but towards the central repository. We will later merge few of
   those.
   (Hint: this is mostly the same as above, for the GitHub path.  But,
   you set the base repository as CodeRefinery.  You might need to
   compare across forks.)
:::
::::

::::{group-tab} Local (VS Code, Command line)

When working locally, it's easier to merge branches: we can just do
the merge, without making a pull request.  But we don't have that step
of review and commenting and possibly adjusting.

:::{exercise}

1. Switch to the `main` branch that you want to merge the *other*
   branch into. (Note that this is the other way around from the
   GitHub path).

Then:

5. Merge the other branch into `main` (which is then your current branch).

6. Find out which branches are merged and thus safe to delete. Then remove them
   and verify that the commits are still there, only the branch labels are
   gone. (Hint: you can delete branches that have been merged into `main`).

7. (optional, advanced) Try to create a new branch, and make a
   GitHub pull request with your recipe, and contribute it to our
   upstream repository.  *This is very complex right now since your
   change has to get to GitHub, and we haven't shown that yet.  We
   don't give a solution for this.*
:::

::::
:::::

The solution below goes over most of the answers, and you are
encouraged to use it when the hints aren't enough - this is by design.


## Solution and walk-through

### (1) Navigate to your branch

Before making the pull request, or doing a merge, it's important to
make sure that you are on the right branch.  Many people have been
frustrated because they forgot this!

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
On GitHub make sure you are on the branch you want to merge from:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-navigate-to-branch.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we navigate to the branch we wish to merge.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Remember, you need to switch to the `main` branch.
This is different from the GitHub path.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
Remember, you need to switch to the `main` branch.
This is different from the GitHub path:
```console
$ git switch main
```
::::
:::::


### (2) Begin the pull request process

In GitHub, the pull request is the way we propose to merge two
branches together.  We start the process of making one.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-contribute.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we get to the pull request process.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
It is possible to open pull requests from the editor, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
It is possible to open pull requests from the command line, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::
:::::


### (3) Fill out and verify the pull request

Check that the pull request is directed to the right repository and branch
and that it contains the changes that you meant to merge.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Things to check:
- Base repository: this should be your own
- Title: make it descriptive
- Description: make it informative
- Scroll down to see commits: are these the ones you want to merge?
- Scroll down to see the changes: are these the ones you want to merge?
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-comparing-changes.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we verify the changes we want to merge.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border

   This screenshot only shows the top part. If you scroll down, you
   can see the commits and the changes. We recommend to do this before
   clicking on "Create pull request".
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::
:::::


### (4) Create the pull request

We actually create the pull request.  Don't forget to navigate to the Network
view after opening the pull request.  Note that the changes proposed in the
pull request are not yet merged.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Click on the green button "Create pull request".

If you click on the little arrow next to "Create pull request", you can also
see the option to "Create draft pull request". This will be interesting later
when collaborating with others. It allows you to open a pull request that is
not ready to be merged yet, but you want to show it to others and get feedback.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
It is possible to create pull requests from the editor, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
It is possible to create pull requests from the command line, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::
:::::


### (5) Merge the pull request

Now, we do the actual merging. We see some effects now.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Review it again (commits and changes), and then click "Merge pull request".

After merging, verify the network view. Also navigate then to your "main"
branch and check that your new recipe is there.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
On the command line, when we merge, we always modify our current branch.

If you are not sure anymore what your current branch is, type:
```console
$ git branch
```

In this case we merge the `new-recipe` branch into our current branch:
```console
$ git merge new-recipe
```
::::
:::::


### (6) Delete merged branches

Before deleting branches, first check whether they are merged.

If you delete an un-merged branch, it will be difficult to find the commits
that were on that branch. If you delete a merged branch, the commits are now
also part of the branch where we have merged to.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
One way to delete the branch is to click on the "Delete branch" button after the pull
request is merged:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-merged.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub suggesting us to delete a branch after it has been merged.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::

But what if we forgot? Then navigate to the branch view:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-branches.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we navigate to the branches view.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::

In the overview we can see that it has been merged and we can delete it:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-branches-overview.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we see an overview of branches and can delete them.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
Verify which branches are merged to the current branch:
```console
$ git branch --merged

* main
  new-recipe
```

This means that it is safe to delete the `new-recipe` branch:
```console
$ git branch -d new-recipe
```

Verify then that the branch is gone but that the commits are still there:
```console
$ git branch
$ git log --oneline
```
::::
:::::


### (7) Contribute to the original repository with a pull request

Remember, this is an advanced step.  If you do this, you are donating
a recipe to everyone.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Now that you know how to create branches and opening a pull request, try to
open a new pull request with a new change but this time the base repository
should be the upstream one.

In other words, you now send a pull request across repositories: from your fork
to the original repository.

Another thing that is different now is that you might not have permissions to
merge the pull request.  We can then together review and browse the pull
request.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Not described. We will return to this in the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
Not described. We will return to this in the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).
::::
:::::


## Resolving a conflict (demonstration)

A conflict is when Git asks humans to decide during a merge which of two
changes to keep if the same portion of a file has been changed in two different
ways on two different branches.

We will practice conflict resolution in the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).

Here we will only demonstrate how to create a conflict and how to resolve it,
all on GitHub.  Once we understand how this works, we will be more confident to
resolve conflicts also in the command line.

How to create a conflict (please try this in your own time):
- Create a new branch from `main` and on it make a change to a file.
- On `main`, make a different change to the same file portion.
- Now try to merge the new branch to `main`. You will get a conflict.

How to resolve conflicts:
- On GitHub, you can resolve conflicts by clicking on the "Resolve conflicts"
  button. This will open a text editor where you can choose which changes to
  keep. After resolving the conflict, you can commit the changes and merge the
  pull request. Make sure to remove the conflict markers.
- Sometimes a conflict is between your change and somebody else's change. In
  that case, you might have to discuss with the other person which changes to
  keep.

How to avoid conflicts:
- We will talk about it in the [collaborative Git
  lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).


## Summary

- We learned how to merge two branches together.
- When is this useful? This is not only useful to combine development lines in
  your own work. Being able to merge branches also forms a basis for collaboration.
- Branches which are merged to other branches are safe to delete, since we only
  delete the "sticky note" next to a commit, not the commits themselves.

Commit message:

content/merging: Add vscode screenshots

content/merging.md, after:

# Merging changes and contributing to the project

Git allows us to have different development lines where we can try things out.
It also allows different people to work on the same project at the same.  This
means that we have to somehow combine the changes later. In this part we will
practice this: {term}`merging`.

:::{objectives}
- Understand that on GitHub merging is done through a {term}`pull request`. Think of it as a change proposal.
- Create and merge a pull request within your own repository.
- Understand (and optionally) do the same to contribute to the {term}`upstream` public repository.
:::

:::{instructor-note}
- 10 min introduction and setup
- 25 min exercise
- 15 min discussion
:::


## Background

* In the last episode, we added a new recipe on a branch.  This allows
  us to test it before it becomes "live".
* Now, we want to bring that change into the "main" branch.
* We find it's not that hard!  But you do have to keep track of the
  steps and make sure that you work very precisely.


## Exercise

In this exercise, we will show how we can **propose changes** and **merge
changes** within our own repository. Optionally, you can propose a recipe to
the {term}`upstream` recipe book - which shows the true purpose of this.  But
this is only a preview and we will practice collaboration much more in the
[collaborative Git lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).

We offer **three different paths** of how to do this exercise.  For
the CodeRefinery workshop day 1, we use and demonstrate the **GitHub
path** only and recommend you do that.  The exercise text below has
some GitHub-specific notes, but most is possibly with any path.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub

First, we make something called a {term}`pull request`, which allows
review and commenting before the actual merge.

:::{exercise} Exercise: Merging branches with pull requests (20 min)
We assume that in the previous exercise you have created a new branch
with a recipe.  In our previous example, it is called `new-recipe`.
If not, create it first and add a recipe to your new branch, see
{doc}`commits`.

We provide basic hints. You should refer to the solution as needed.

1. Navigate to your branch from the previous episode
   (Hint: the same branch view we used last time).

1. Begin the pull request process.
   (Hint: There is a "Contribute" button in the branch view).

1. Add or modify the pull request title and description, and verify the other data.
   In the pull request verify the target repository and the target
   branch. Make sure that you are merging within your own repository.
   **GitHub: By default, it will offer to make the change to the
   upstream repository, `coderefinery`.  You should change this**, you
   shouldn't contribute your test recipe upstream yet.  Where it says
   `base repository`, select your own user's repository.

1. Create the pull request by clicking "Create pull request". Browse
   the network view to see if anything has changed yet.

1. Merge the pull request, or if you are not on GitHub you can merge
   the branch locally. Browse the network again. What has changed?

1. Find out which branches are merged and thus safe to delete. Then remove them
   and verify that the commits are still there, only the branch labels are
   gone. (Hint: you can delete branches that have been merged into `main`).

1. Optional: Try to create a new branch with a new change, then open a pull
   request but towards the central repository. We will later merge few of
   those.
   (Hint: this is mostly the same as above, for the GitHub path.  But,
   you set the base repository as CodeRefinery.  You might need to
   compare across forks.)
:::
::::

::::{group-tab} Local (VS Code, Command line)

When working locally, it's easier to merge branches: we can just do
the merge, without making a pull request.  But we don't have that step
of review and commenting and possibly adjusting.

:::{exercise}

1. Switch to the `main` branch that you want to merge the *other*
   branch into. (Note that this is the other way around from the
   GitHub path).

Then:

5. Merge the other branch into `main` (which is then your current branch).

6. Find out which branches are merged and thus safe to delete. Then remove them
   and verify that the commits are still there, only the branch labels are
   gone. (Hint: you can delete branches that have been merged into `main`).

7. (optional, advanced) Try to create a new branch, and make a
   GitHub pull request with your recipe, and contribute it to our
   upstream repository.  *This is very complex right now since your
   change has to get to GitHub, and we haven't shown that yet.  We
   don't give a solution for this.*
:::

::::
:::::

The solution below goes over most of the answers, and you are
encouraged to use it when the hints aren't enough - this is by design.


## Solution and walk-through

### (1) Navigate to your branch

Before making the pull request, or doing a merge, it's important to
make sure that you are on the right branch.  Many people have been
frustrated because they forgot this!

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
On GitHub make sure you are on the branch you want to merge from:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-navigate-to-branch.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we navigate to the branch we wish to merge.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Remember, you need to switch to the `main` branch.
This is different from the GitHub path.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
Remember, you need to switch to the `main` branch.
This is different from the GitHub path:
```console
$ git switch main
```
::::
:::::


### (2) Begin the pull request process

In GitHub, the pull request is the way we propose to merge two
branches together.  We start the process of making one.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-contribute.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we get to the pull request process.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
It is possible to open pull requests from the editor, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
It is possible to open pull requests from the command line, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::
:::::


### (3) Fill out and verify the pull request

Check that the pull request is directed to the right repository and branch
and that it contains the changes that you meant to merge.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Things to check:
- Base repository: this should be your own
- Title: make it descriptive
- Description: make it informative
- Scroll down to see commits: are these the ones you want to merge?
- Scroll down to see the changes: are these the ones you want to merge?
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-comparing-changes.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we verify the changes we want to merge.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border

   This screenshot only shows the top part. If you scroll down, you
   can see the commits and the changes. We recommend to do this before
   clicking on "Create pull request".
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::
:::::


### (4) Create the pull request

We actually create the pull request.  Don't forget to navigate to the Network
view after opening the pull request.  Note that the changes proposed in the
pull request are not yet merged.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Click on the green button "Create pull request".

If you click on the little arrow next to "Create pull request", you can also
see the option to "Create draft pull request". This will be interesting later
when collaborating with others. It allows you to open a pull request that is
not ready to be merged yet, but you want to show it to others and get feedback.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
It is possible to create pull requests from the editor, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
It is possible to create pull requests from the command line, but 
we don't cover that here.

If you are working locally, continue to step 5.
::::
:::::


### (5) Merge the pull request

Now, we do the actual merging. We see some effects now.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Review it again (commits and changes), and then click "Merge pull request".

After merging, verify the network view. Also navigate then to your "main"
branch and check that your new recipe is there.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Just like with the command line, when we merge we modify our *current* branch.  Verify you are on the `main` branch.

1. Verify current branch at the bottom.
1. From the version control sidebar → Three dots → Branch → Merge
1. In the selector that comes up, choose the branch you want to merge *from*.  The commits on that branch will be added to the current branch.

:::{figure} img/merging/vscode-merging.png
:alt: VSCode screenshot as described
:width: 80%
:class: with-border
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
On the command line, when we merge, we always modify our *current* branch.

If you are not sure anymore what your current branch is, type:
```console
$ git branch
```

In this case we merge the `new-recipe` branch into our current branch:
```console
$ git merge new-recipe
```
::::
:::::


### (6) Delete merged branches

Before deleting branches, first check whether they are merged.

If you delete an un-merged branch, it will be difficult to find the commits
that were on that branch. If you delete a merged branch, the commits are now
also part of the branch where we have merged to.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
One way to delete the branch is to click on the "Delete branch" button after the pull
request is merged:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-merged.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub suggesting us to delete a branch after it has been merged.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::

But what if we forgot? Then navigate to the branch view:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-branches.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we navigate to the branches view.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::

In the overview we can see that it has been merged and we can delete it:
   :::{figure} img/merging/github-branches-overview.png
   :alt: Screenshot on GitHub where we see an overview of branches and can delete them.
   :width: 80%
   :class: with-border
   :::
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
From the source control sidebar, → the three dots (as before) → Branch → Delete Branch.  Select the branch name to delete.
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
Verify which branches are merged to the current branch:
```console
$ git branch --merged

* main
  new-recipe
```

This means that it is safe to delete the `new-recipe` branch:
```console
$ git branch -d new-recipe
```

Verify then that the branch is gone but that the commits are still there:
```console
$ git branch
$ git log --oneline
```
::::
:::::


### (7) Contribute to the original repository with a pull request

Remember, this is an advanced step.  If you do this, you are donating
a recipe to everyone.

:::::{tabs}
::::{group-tab} GitHub
Now that you know how to create branches and opening a pull request, try to
open a new pull request with a new change but this time the base repository
should be the upstream one.

In other words, you now send a pull request across repositories: from your fork
to the original repository.

Another thing that is different now is that you might not have permissions to
merge the pull request.  We can then together review and browse the pull
request.
::::

::::{group-tab} VS Code
Not described. We will return to this in the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).
::::

::::{group-tab} Command line
Not described. We will return to this in the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).
::::
:::::


## Resolving a conflict (demonstration)

A conflict is when Git asks humans to decide during a merge which of two
changes to keep if the same portion of a file has been changed in two different
ways on two different branches.

We will practice conflict resolution in the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).

Here we will only demonstrate how to create a conflict and how to resolve it,
all on GitHub.  Once we understand how this works, we will be more confident to
resolve conflicts also in the command line.

How to create a conflict (please try this in your own time):
- Create a new branch from `main` and on it make a change to a file.
- On `main`, make a different change to the same file portion.
- Now try to merge the new branch to `main`. You will get a conflict.

How to resolve conflicts:
- On GitHub, you can resolve conflicts by clicking on the "Resolve conflicts"
  button. This will open a text editor where you can choose which changes to
  keep. After resolving the conflict, you can commit the changes and merge the
  pull request. Make sure to remove the conflict markers.
- Sometimes a conflict is between your change and somebody else's change. In
  that case, you might have to discuss with the other person which changes to
  keep.

How to avoid conflicts:
- We will talk about it in the [collaborative Git
  lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).


## Summary

- We learned how to merge two branches together.
- When is this useful? This is not only useful to combine development lines in
  your own work. Being able to merge branches also forms a basis for collaboration.
- Branches which are merged to other branches are safe to delete, since we only
  delete the "sticky note" next to a commit, not the commits themselves.
