content/motivation.md, before:

# Motivation

```{objectives}
- Make sure nobody leaves the workshop without starting to use some form of version control.
- Discuss the reasons why we advocate distributed version control.
```

```{instructor-note}
- 15 min teaching/demonstration
```


## The essence of version control

- System which **records snapshots** of a project
- Implements **branching**:
  - You can work on several feature branches and switch between them
  - Different people can work on the same code/project without interfering
  - You can experiment with an idea and discard it if it turns out to be a bad idea
- Implements **merging**:
  - Person A and B's simultaneous work can be easily combined


### What we typically like to snapshot

- Software (this is how it started but Git/GitHub can track a lot more)
- Scripts
- Documents (plain text files much better suitable than Word documents)
- Manuscripts (Git is great for collaborating/sharing LaTeX or [Quarto](https://quarto.org/) manuscripts)
- Configuration files
- Website sources
- Data


````{discussion}
  Discuss the following directory listing. What possible problems
  do you anticipate with this kind of "version control":
  ```shell
  mylib-1.2.4_18.3.07.tgz         somecode_CP_10.8.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.4_27.7.07.tgz         somecode_CP_17.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.4_29.4.08.tgz         somecode_CP_23.8.07_final.tgz
  mylib-1.2.4_6.10.07.tgz         somecode_CP_24.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_23.4.08.tgz         somecode_CP_25.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_25.5.07.tgz         somecode_CP_29.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_6.6.07.tgz          somecode_CP_30.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_bexc.tgz            somecode_CP_6.10.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_d0.tgz              somecode_CP_6.6.07.tgz
  mylib-1.3.0_4.4.08.tgz          somecode_CP_8.6.07.tgz
  mylib-1.3.1_4.4.08.tgz          somecode_KT.tgz
  mylib-1.3.2_22.4.08.tgz         somecode_PI1_2007.tgz
  mylib-1.3.2_4.4.08.tgz          somecode_PI_2007.tgz
  mylib-1.3.2_5.4.08.tgz          somecode_PI2_2007.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_1.5.08.tgz          somecode_PI_CP_18.3.07.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_20.5.08.tgz         somecode_11.5.08.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_tstrm_27.6.08.tgz   somecode_15.4.08.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_wk_10.8.08.tgz      somecode_17.6.09_unfinished.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_wk_11.8.08.tgz      somecode_19.7.09.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_wk_13.8.08.tgz      somecode-20.7.09.tgz
  ...
  ```

  ```{solution}
  - Giving a version to a collaborator and merging changes later with own
    changes sounds like lots of work.
  - What if you discover a bug and want to know since when the bug existed?
  ```
````


## Why version control

### Roll-back functionality

- Mistakes happen - without recorded snapshots you cannot easily undo mistakes and **go back to a working version**.


### Branching

- Often you need to work on **several issues/features in one code** - without branching this can be messy and confusing.
- You can simulate branching by copying the entire code to multiple places but also this will be messy and confusing.


### Collaboration

With version control, none of these are needed anymore (or have much simpler answers):

- *"I will just finish my work and then you can start with your changes."*
- *"Can you please send me the latest version?"*
- *"Where is the latest version?"*
- *"Which version are you using?"*
- *"Which version have the authors used in the paper I am trying to reproduce?"*


### Reproducibility

- How do you indicate which version of your code you have used in your paper?
- When you find a bug, how do you know **when precisely** this bug was introduced
  (Are published results affected? Do you need to inform collaborators or users of your code?).


### Compare with Dropbox or Google Drive

- Document/code is in one place, no need to email snapshots.
- How can you use an old version? Possible to get old versions but in a much less useful way - snapshots of files, not directories.
- What if you want to work on multiple versions at the same time? Do you make a copy? How do you merge copies?
- What if you don't have internet?


```{discussion} Why Git?
We will use [Git](https://git-scm.com) to record snapshots of our work:
- **Easy to set up**: no server needed.
- **Very popular**: chances are high you will need to contribute to somebody else's code which is tracked with Git.
- **Distributed**: good backup, no single point of failure, you can track and
  clean-up changes offline, simplifies collaboration model for open-source
  projects.
- Important **platforms** such as [GitHub](https://github.com), [GitLab](https://gitlab.com), and [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org)
  build on top of Git.

However, any version control is better than no version control and it is OK to prefer a different tool than Git.

Other tools:
- [Subversion](https://subversion.apache.org)
- [Mercurial](https://www.mercurial-scm.org)

Interesting newcomer:
- [Pijul](https://pijul.org/)
```


## Difficulties of version control

Despite the benefits, let's be honest, there are some difficulties:

- One more thing to learn (it's probably worth it and will save you more time in the long run; basic career skill).
- Difficult if some people don't want to use it (in the worst case, you can version control on your side and send them versions).
- Advanced things can be difficult, a bit too many gotchas (basics are often enough, ask others for help when needed).


## A real-life example

Before we create a new repository from scratch and learn how to record changes
and create and merge branches, let us explore an **existing Git repository** on
GitHub.  The goal here is not to teach GitHub yet (we will explain some of the
concepts later), but rather to get a glimpse of the wider picture and see the
social aspect to know what our end goal is.

As an example we can explore a famous Git repository which was used
to produce the Event Horizon Telescope images: [https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging).

- History
  - Explore the [repository](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging).
  - Explore the [history](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/commits/main).
  - Note that there are [branches](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/network).
- Reproducibility
  - Discuss the enormous value of the annotation feature: [example file](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/blame/main/ehtim/imaging/starwarps.py).
- Collaboration
  - You can refer to [code portions](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/blob/31361ab62c5718b08612fc75e409795f004f5071/ehtim/imaging/starwarps.py#L66-L75)
    (so much simpler to send a link rather than describe which file to open and where to scroll to).
  - Browse the [forks](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/network/members).
  - See [contributors](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/graphs/contributors).
- Releases
  - Explore the [release history](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/releases).

While some of these are GitHub features, it all can be done on other sites, or
by yourself without GitHub at all.

Commit message:

code sent by email often lands in the spam filter

content/motivation.md, after:

# Motivation

```{objectives}
- Make sure nobody leaves the workshop without starting to use some form of version control.
- Discuss the reasons why we advocate distributed version control.
```

```{instructor-note}
- 15 min teaching/demonstration
```


## The essence of version control

- System which **records snapshots** of a project
- Implements **branching**:
  - You can work on several feature branches and switch between them
  - Different people can work on the same code/project without interfering
  - You can experiment with an idea and discard it if it turns out to be a bad idea
- Implements **merging**:
  - Person A and B's simultaneous work can be easily combined


### What we typically like to snapshot

- Software (this is how it started but Git/GitHub can track a lot more)
- Scripts
- Documents (plain text files much better suitable than Word documents)
- Manuscripts (Git is great for collaborating/sharing LaTeX or [Quarto](https://quarto.org/) manuscripts)
- Configuration files
- Website sources
- Data


````{discussion}
  Discuss the following directory listing. What possible problems
  do you anticipate with this kind of "version control":
  ```shell
  mylib-1.2.4_18.3.07.tgz         somecode_CP_10.8.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.4_27.7.07.tgz         somecode_CP_17.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.4_29.4.08.tgz         somecode_CP_23.8.07_final.tgz
  mylib-1.2.4_6.10.07.tgz         somecode_CP_24.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_23.4.08.tgz         somecode_CP_25.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_25.5.07.tgz         somecode_CP_29.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_6.6.07.tgz          somecode_CP_30.5.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_bexc.tgz            somecode_CP_6.10.07.tgz
  mylib-1.2.5_d0.tgz              somecode_CP_6.6.07.tgz
  mylib-1.3.0_4.4.08.tgz          somecode_CP_8.6.07.tgz
  mylib-1.3.1_4.4.08.tgz          somecode_KT.tgz
  mylib-1.3.2_22.4.08.tgz         somecode_PI1_2007.tgz
  mylib-1.3.2_4.4.08.tgz          somecode_PI_2007.tgz
  mylib-1.3.2_5.4.08.tgz          somecode_PI2_2007.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_1.5.08.tgz          somecode_PI_CP_18.3.07.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_20.5.08.tgz         somecode_11.5.08.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_tstrm_27.6.08.tgz   somecode_15.4.08.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_wk_10.8.08.tgz      somecode_17.6.09_unfinished.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_wk_11.8.08.tgz      somecode_19.7.09.tgz
  mylib-1.3.3_wk_13.8.08.tgz      somecode-20.7.09.tgz
  ...
  ```

  ```{solution}
  - Giving a version to a collaborator and merging changes later with own
    changes sounds like lots of work.
  - What if you discover a bug and want to know since when the bug existed?
  ```
````


## Why version control

### Roll-back functionality

- Mistakes happen - without recorded snapshots you cannot easily undo mistakes and **go back to a working version**.


### Branching

- Often you need to work on **several issues/features in one code** - without branching this can be messy and confusing.
- You can simulate branching by copying the entire code to multiple places but also this will be messy and confusing.


### Collaboration

With version control, none of these are needed anymore (or have much simpler answers):

- *"I will just finish my work and then you can start with your changes."*
- *"Can you please send me the latest version?"*
- *"You never got the code I send by email? Maybe the spam filter marked it as malicious?"*
- *"Where is the latest version?"*
- *"Which version are you using?"*
- *"Which version have the authors used in the paper I am trying to reproduce?"*


### Reproducibility

- How do you indicate which version of your code you have used in your paper?
- When you find a bug, how do you know **when precisely** this bug was introduced
  (Are published results affected? Do you need to inform collaborators or users of your code?).


### Compare with Dropbox or Google Drive

- Document/code is in one place, no need to email snapshots.
- How can you use an old version? Possible to get old versions but in a much less useful way - snapshots of files, not directories.
- What if you want to work on multiple versions at the same time? Do you make a copy? How do you merge copies?
- What if you don't have internet?


```{discussion} Why Git?
We will use [Git](https://git-scm.com) to record snapshots of our work:
- **Easy to set up**: no server needed.
- **Very popular**: chances are high you will need to contribute to somebody else's code which is tracked with Git.
- **Distributed**: good backup, no single point of failure, you can track and
  clean-up changes offline, simplifies collaboration model for open-source
  projects.
- Important **platforms** such as [GitHub](https://github.com), [GitLab](https://gitlab.com), and [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org)
  build on top of Git.

However, any version control is better than no version control and it is OK to prefer a different tool than Git.

Other tools:
- [Subversion](https://subversion.apache.org)
- [Mercurial](https://www.mercurial-scm.org)

Interesting newcomer:
- [Pijul](https://pijul.org/)
```


## Difficulties of version control

Despite the benefits, let's be honest, there are some difficulties:

- One more thing to learn (it's probably worth it and will save you more time in the long run; basic career skill).
- Difficult if some people don't want to use it (in the worst case, you can version control on your side and send them versions).
- Advanced things can be difficult, a bit too many gotchas (basics are often enough, ask others for help when needed).


## A real-life example

Before we create a new repository from scratch and learn how to record changes
and create and merge branches, let us explore an **existing Git repository** on
GitHub.  The goal here is not to teach GitHub yet (we will explain some of the
concepts later), but rather to get a glimpse of the wider picture and see the
social aspect to know what our end goal is.

As an example we can explore a famous Git repository which was used
to produce the Event Horizon Telescope images: [https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging).

- History
  - Explore the [repository](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging).
  - Explore the [history](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/commits/main).
  - Note that there are [branches](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/network).
- Reproducibility
  - Discuss the enormous value of the annotation feature: [example file](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/blame/main/ehtim/imaging/starwarps.py).
- Collaboration
  - You can refer to [code portions](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/blob/31361ab62c5718b08612fc75e409795f004f5071/ehtim/imaging/starwarps.py#L66-L75)
    (so much simpler to send a link rather than describe which file to open and where to scroll to).
  - Browse the [forks](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/network/members).
  - See [contributors](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/graphs/contributors).
- Releases
  - Explore the [release history](https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging/releases).

While some of these are GitHub features, it all can be done on other sites, or
by yourself without GitHub at all.
