content/remotes.md, before:

# Sharing repositories online

```{objectives}
- We get a feeling for remote repositories ([more later](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/)).
- We are able to publish a repository on the web.
- We are able to fetch and track a repository from the web.
```

```{instructor-note}
- 30 min demonstration/type-along
```


## From our laptops to the web

We have seen that **creating Git repositories and moving them around is
simple** and that is great.

So far everything was local and all snapshots, branches, and tags are saved under `.git`.

If we remove `.git`, we remove all Git history of a project.

```{discussion}
- What if the hard disk fails?
- What if somebody steals my laptop?
- How can we collaborate with others across the web?
```


## Remotes

We will learn how to work with remote repositories in detail in the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson.

In this section we only want to get a taste to prepare us for other lessons
where we will employ GitHub.  Our goal is to publish our guacamole recipe on
the web. Don't worry, you will be able to remove it afterwards.

To store your git data on another server, you use **remotes**.
A remote is a repository on its own, with its own branches
We can **push** changes to the remote and **pull**
from the remote.

You might use remotes to:
- Back up your own work.
- To collaborate with other people.

There are different types of remotes:
- If you have a server you can ssh to, you can use that as a remote.
- [GitHub](https://github.com) is a popular, closed-source commercial site.
- [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com) is a popular, open-core
  commercial site.  Many universities have their own private GitLab servers
  set up.
- [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org) is yet another popular commercial site.
- Another option is [NotABug](https://notabug.org)
- We also operate a [Nordic
  research software repository
  platform](https://coderefinery.org/repository/).
  This is GitLab, free for researchers and allows private,
  cross-university sharing.


## Type-along: Create a new repository on GitHub

```{important}

Don't do anything yet.  We make a choice in the next section, and then
do these steps in the following one.
```

For the rest of this page, we will make a new repository for our
guacamole recipe on GitHub ({ref}`here <index>` we motivate why we demonstrate this
with GitHub),
send our code to it, and then see how
others can get the code from it.

````{admonition} If you don't have the recipe repository from previous episodes
Maybe you joined the workshop later or got stuck somewhere? **No problem**!

**If you don't have the recipe repository from previous episodes**, you can
clone our version of the repository using (please **skip this if you have the recipe
repository on your computer already**):
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-before-merge.git recipe
$ cd recipe
$ git remote remove origin
```

Now you have a repository called `recipe` on your computer with a couple of
commits. Further down we will also clarify what `git clone` does.
````

Make sure that you are **logged into GitHub**.

```{figure} img/creating-using-web/new-top-left.png
:width: 60%
:class: with-border

To create a repository we either click the green button "New" (top left corner).
```

```{figure} img/creating-using-web/new-top-right.png
:width: 60%
:class: with-border

Or if you see your profile page, there is a "+" menu (top right corner).
```

Yet another way to create a new repository is to visit
[https://github.com/new](https://github.com/new) directly.

---

On this page choose a project name.
For the sake of this exercise **do not select**
"Initialize this repository with a README" (what will happen if you do?):
```{figure} img/creating-using-web/creating.png
:width: 100%
:class: with-border
```

Once you click the green "Create repository", you will see a page similar to:
```{figure} img/creating-using-web/created.png
:width: 100%
:class: with-border
```

What this means is that we have now an empty project with either an HTTPS or an
SSH address: click on the HTTPS and SSH buttons to see what happens.

---

## Authenticating to Github: SSH or HTTPS?

**How does Github know who you are?**  This is hard and there are two
options.

* **SSH** is the classic method, which could have been set up in the
  [installation instructions](LINK)
* **HTTPS** works with the **Git Credential Manager**, which is an
  extra add-on that works easily in Windows and Mac.

Test which one you should use:

`````{tabs}
````{group-tab} SSH
Try this command:

```console
$ ssh -T git@github.com
```
If it returns `Hi USERNAME! You've successfully authenticated, ...`,
then SSH is configured and the following steps will work with the SSH
cloning.

See our [installation
instructions](https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/ssh/) to
set up SSH access.

````
````{group-tab} HTTPS
```console
$ git config --get credential.manager
```
If it return anything, then the credential manager is probably
configured and HTTPS cloning will work (but you can't verify it until
you try using it).
````
`````

If you do not have these configured, please watch as we do this episode and you
can prepare before the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/), where we will need
one of these set up.


---

## Pushing our guacamole recipe repository to GitHub

To push changes to the project please **select SSH**.
For this to work [you will need your SSH keys configured](https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/ssh/).

We now want to try the second option that GitHub suggests:

> **... or push an existing repository from the command line**

1. Now go to your guacamole repository on your computer.
2. Check that you are in the right place with `git status`.
3. Copy paste the three lines to the terminal and execute those, in my case (**you
  need to replace the "user" part and possibly also the repository name**):


  `````{tabs}
  ````{group-tab} SSH
  See above for if SSH is the right option for you.
  ```console
  $ git remote add origin git@github.com:user/recipe.git
  ```
  ````
  ````{group-tab} HTTPS
  See above for if HTTPS is the right option for you.
  ```console
  $ git remote add origin https://github.com/user/recipe.git
  ```
  ````
  `````

  ```console
  $ git branch -M main
  $ git push -u origin main
  ```

The meaning of the above lines:
- Add a remote reference with the name "origin"
- Rename current branch to "main"
- Push branch "main" to "origin"

You should now see:

```text
Enumerating objects: 3, done.
Counting objects: 100% (3/3), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 221 bytes | 221.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
To github.com:user/recipe.git
 * [new branch]      main -> main
Branch 'main' set up to track remote branch 'main' from 'origin'.
```

### Exercise: Push your guacamole recipe to GitHub

```{exercise} Push-1: Push your guacamole recipe to GitHub
- Go to your recipe directory on your computer.
- Check that you are in the right place with `git status`.
- Define the remote with `git remote add origin git@github.com:user/recipe.git`.
- Rename the current branch to "main", if needed: `git branch -M main`.
- Push the local branch "main" to the remote: `git push -u origin main`.
```

**Reload your GitHub project website and - taa-daa - your commits should now be
online!**

What just happened? **Think of publishing a repository as uploading the `.git` part online**.

---

## Cloning a repository

Now other people can clone this repository and contribute changes. In the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson
we will learn how this works.

At this point only a brief demo - if you copy the SSH or HTTPS address, you can clone repositories like this
(again adapt the "namespace/repository.git" part):


`````{tabs}
````{group-tab} SSH
```console
$ git clone git@github.com:user/recipe.git
```
````
````{group-tab} HTTPS
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/user/recipe.git
```
````
`````

This creates a directory called "recipe" unless it already exists. You can also specify the target directory
on your computer:

`````{tabs}
````{group-tab} SSH
```console
$ git clone git@github.com:user/recipe.git myrecipe
```
````
````{group-tab} HTTPS
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/user/recipe.git myrecipe
```
````
`````

What just happened? **Think of cloning as downloading the `.git` part to your
computer**. After downloading the `.git` part the branch pointed to by HEAD is
automatically checked out.

```{keypoints}
- A repository can have one or multiple remotes (we will revisit these later).
- Local branches often track remote branches.
- A remote serves as a full backup of your work.
- We'll properly learn how to use these in the [Collaborative Git lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).
```

Commit message:

content/remotes: A few extra notes about HTTPS/SSH in the future

content/remotes.md, after:

# Sharing repositories online

```{objectives}
- We get a feeling for remote repositories ([more later](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/)).
- We are able to publish a repository on the web.
- We are able to fetch and track a repository from the web.
```

```{instructor-note}
- 30 min demonstration/type-along
```


## From our laptops to the web

We have seen that **creating Git repositories and moving them around is
simple** and that is great.

So far everything was local and all snapshots, branches, and tags are saved under `.git`.

If we remove `.git`, we remove all Git history of a project.

```{discussion}
- What if the hard disk fails?
- What if somebody steals my laptop?
- How can we collaborate with others across the web?
```


## Remotes

We will learn how to work with remote repositories in detail in the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson.

In this section we only want to get a taste to prepare us for other lessons
where we will employ GitHub.  Our goal is to publish our guacamole recipe on
the web. Don't worry, you will be able to remove it afterwards.

To store your git data on another server, you use **remotes**.
A remote is a repository on its own, with its own branches
We can **push** changes to the remote and **pull**
from the remote.

You might use remotes to:
- Back up your own work.
- To collaborate with other people.

There are different types of remotes:
- If you have a server you can ssh to, you can use that as a remote.
- [GitHub](https://github.com) is a popular, closed-source commercial site.
- [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com) is a popular, open-core
  commercial site.  Many universities have their own private GitLab servers
  set up.
- [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org) is yet another popular commercial site.
- Another option is [NotABug](https://notabug.org)
- We also operate a [Nordic
  research software repository
  platform](https://coderefinery.org/repository/).
  This is GitLab, free for researchers and allows private,
  cross-university sharing.


## Type-along: Create a new repository on GitHub

```{important}

Don't do anything yet.  We make a choice in the next section, and then
do these steps in the following one.
```

For the rest of this page, we will make a new repository for our
guacamole recipe on GitHub ({ref}`here <index>` we motivate why we demonstrate this
with GitHub),
send our code to it, and then see how
others can get the code from it.

````{admonition} If you don't have the recipe repository from previous episodes
Maybe you joined the workshop later or got stuck somewhere? **No problem**!

**If you don't have the recipe repository from previous episodes**, you can
clone our version of the repository using (please **skip this if you have the recipe
repository on your computer already**):
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/coderefinery/recipe-before-merge.git recipe
$ cd recipe
$ git remote remove origin
```

Now you have a repository called `recipe` on your computer with a couple of
commits. Further down we will also clarify what `git clone` does.
````

Make sure that you are **logged into GitHub**.

```{figure} img/creating-using-web/new-top-left.png
:width: 60%
:class: with-border

To create a repository we either click the green button "New" (top left corner).
```

```{figure} img/creating-using-web/new-top-right.png
:width: 60%
:class: with-border

Or if you see your profile page, there is a "+" menu (top right corner).
```

Yet another way to create a new repository is to visit
[https://github.com/new](https://github.com/new) directly.

---

On this page choose a project name.
For the sake of this exercise **do not select**
"Initialize this repository with a README" (what will happen if you do?):
```{figure} img/creating-using-web/creating.png
:width: 100%
:class: with-border
```

Once you click the green "Create repository", you will see a page similar to:
```{figure} img/creating-using-web/created.png
:width: 100%
:class: with-border
```

What this means is that we have now an empty project with either an HTTPS or an
SSH address: click on the HTTPS and SSH buttons to see what happens.

---

## Authenticating to Github: SSH or HTTPS?

**How does Github know who you are?**  This is hard and there are two
options.

* **SSH** is the classic method, which could have been set up in the
  [installation instructions](LINK)
* **HTTPS** works with the **Git Credential Manager**, which is an
  extra add-on that works easily in Windows and Mac.

Test which one you should use:

`````{tabs}
````{group-tab} SSH
Try this command:

```console
$ ssh -T git@github.com
```
If it returns `Hi USERNAME! You've successfully authenticated, ...`,
then SSH is configured and the following steps will work with the SSH
cloning.

See our [installation
instructions](https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/ssh/) to
set up SSH access.

**From now on, if you know that SSH works, you should always select
SSH as the clone URL from Github, or translate the URL to start with
the right thing yourself:** `git@github.com:`
````
````{group-tab} HTTPS
```console
$ git config --get credential.manager
```
If it return anything, then the credential manager is probably
configured and HTTPS cloning will work (but you can't verify it until
you try using it).

From now on, **if you know that HTTPS works, you should always select
HTTPS as the clone URL from Github, or translate the URL to start with
the right thing yourself:** `https://github.com/`
````
`````

If you do not have these configured, please watch as we do this episode and you
can prepare before the [collaborative Git
lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/), where we will need
one of these set up.


---

## Pushing our guacamole recipe repository to GitHub

To push changes to the project please **select SSH**.
For this to work [you will need your SSH keys configured](https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/ssh/).

We now want to try the second option that GitHub suggests:

> **... or push an existing repository from the command line**

1. Now go to your guacamole repository on your computer.
2. Check that you are in the right place with `git status`.
3. Copy paste the three lines to the terminal and execute those, in my case (**you
  need to replace the "user" part and possibly also the repository name**):


  `````{tabs}
  ````{group-tab} SSH
  See above for if SSH is the right option for you.
  ```console
  $ git remote add origin git@github.com:user/recipe.git
  ```
  ````
  ````{group-tab} HTTPS
  See above for if HTTPS is the right option for you.
  ```console
  $ git remote add origin https://github.com/user/recipe.git
  ```
  ````
  `````

  ```console
  $ git branch -M main
  $ git push -u origin main
  ```

The meaning of the above lines:
- Add a remote reference with the name "origin"
- Rename current branch to "main"
- Push branch "main" to "origin"

You should now see:

```text
Enumerating objects: 3, done.
Counting objects: 100% (3/3), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 221 bytes | 221.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
To github.com:user/recipe.git
 * [new branch]      main -> main
Branch 'main' set up to track remote branch 'main' from 'origin'.
```

### Exercise: Push your guacamole recipe to GitHub

```{exercise} Push-1: Push your guacamole recipe to GitHub
- Go to your recipe directory on your computer.
- Check that you are in the right place with `git status`.
- Define the remote with `git remote add origin git@github.com:user/recipe.git`.
- Rename the current branch to "main", if needed: `git branch -M main`.
- Push the local branch "main" to the remote: `git push -u origin main`.
```

**Reload your GitHub project website and - taa-daa - your commits should now be
online!**

What just happened? **Think of publishing a repository as uploading the `.git` part online**.

---

## Cloning a repository

Now other people can clone this repository and contribute changes. In the
[collaborative distributed version control](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/) lesson
we will learn how this works.

At this point only a brief demo - if you copy the SSH or HTTPS address, you can clone repositories like this
(again adapt the `USER` in the "USER/repository.git" part):


`````{tabs}
````{group-tab} SSH
```console
$ git clone git@github.com:USER/recipe.git
```

**From now on, if you are using SSH, you should pay attention and make
sure your clone URLs start with `git@github.com:` now and in future
lessons.**
````
````{group-tab} HTTPS
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/USER/recipe.git
```

**From now on, if you are using HTTPS, you should pay attention and make
sure your clone URLs start with `https://github.com/` now and in future
lessons.**
````
`````

This creates a directory called "recipe" unless it already exists. You can also specify the target directory
on your computer:

`````{tabs}
````{group-tab} SSH
```console
$ git clone git@github.com:user/recipe.git myrecipe
```
````
````{group-tab} HTTPS
```console
$ git clone https://github.com/user/recipe.git myrecipe
```
````
`````

What just happened? **Think of cloning as downloading the `.git` part to your
computer**. After downloading the `.git` part the branch pointed to by HEAD is
automatically checked out.

```{keypoints}
- A repository can have one or multiple remotes (we will revisit these later).
- Local branches often track remote branches.
- A remote serves as a full backup of your work.
- We'll properly learn how to use these in the [Collaborative Git lesson](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-collaborative/).
```
