content/what-to-avoid.md, before:

# What to avoid

The idea for this page came up during a discussion: quick reference page of
things that you should not do with Git. Basically, a list of some common Git
gotchas.

**Postponing commits because the changes are "unfinished"/"ugly"**: It is
better to have many OK-ish commits than too few perfect commits.  Too few
perfect commits are probably too large and make undoing more difficult.  It is
also easier to combine too small commits than it is to split too large commits.
The longer you wait because of this, the harder it will be to
commit it at all.

**Commit unrelated changes together**: Makes it difficult to undo changes since
it can undo also the unrelated change.
But, this is the counterpoint to the first point: In the end, it is probably better to make big
ugly commits than to never commit.  This is especially true in in the chaotic early
phases of small projects.

**Too ambitious branch which risks to never get completed**: The branch will
never merge back and be so big and so ambitious with too many/big features that
the risk is high that once it is really ready, there are conflicts everywhere.

**Committing generated files**: See {ref}`gitignore`.

**Over-engineering the branch layout and safeguards in small projects**: This
may prevent people from contributing (maybe even including yourself?). Add more restrictions and safeguards as
the project and the group of collaborators grows.

**Commit messages what has been changed but do not explain why it has been
changed**: This is as useful as code comments which describe the "obvious" such
as "this is a loop" instead of explaining why something is done this way.
But don't let perfect commit messages stop you from the most important point, committing often (first point).

**Commit huge files**: Huge files get sometimes accidentally added and
committed which can significantly increase the repository size. Note that a
subsequent `git rm` does not remove the addition from the repository history.
Code review can help detecting accidental large file additions.

Commit message:

content/what-to-avoid: don't forget to pull before doing new work
- review: general check

content/what-to-avoid.md, after:

# What to avoid

The idea for this page came up during a discussion: quick reference page of
things that you should not do with Git. Basically, a list of some common Git
gotchas.

**Postponing commits because the changes are "unfinished"/"ugly"**: It is
better to have many OK-ish commits than too few perfect commits.  Too few
perfect commits are probably too large and make undoing more difficult.  It is
also easier to combine too small commits than it is to split too large commits.
The longer you wait because of this, the harder it will be to
commit it at all.

**Not pulling/rebasing before doing new work**: Few things are worse
than doing work and then noticing a lot of conflicts because
un-related work was done in the meantime..  Or noticing that someone
else has already done it.  This problem is largest when you come back
to an active project weeks or months later.

**Commit unrelated changes together**: Makes it difficult to undo changes since
it can undo also the unrelated change.
But, this is the counterpoint to the first point: In the end, it is probably better to make big
ugly commits than to never commit.  This is especially true in in the chaotic early
phases of small projects.

**Too ambitious branch which risks to never get completed**: The branch will
never merge back and be so big and so ambitious with too many/big features that
the risk is high that once it is really ready, there are conflicts everywhere.

**Committing generated files**: See {ref}`gitignore`.

**Over-engineering the branch layout and safeguards in small projects**: This
may prevent people from contributing (maybe even including yourself?). Add more restrictions and safeguards as
the project and the group of collaborators grows.

**Commit messages what has been changed but do not explain why it has been
changed**: This is as useful as code comments which describe the "obvious" such
as "this is a loop" instead of explaining why something is done this way.
But don't let perfect commit messages stop you from the most important point, committing often (first point).

**Commit huge files**: Huge files get sometimes accidentally added and
committed which can significantly increase the repository size. Note that a
subsequent `git rm` does not remove the addition from the repository history.
Code review can help detecting accidental large file additions.
